in the
world the Palestinian Israeli conflict
has been a key dividing line of
international diplomacy for decades ever
since Israel's foundation in
1948 disputes have revolved around the
occupi Palestinian territories human
rights violations and the fight for
Palestinian
self-determination this struggle
contrast with the conflict's escalations
and the statehood and security concerns
of Israel leading to repeated cycles of
violence negotiations and humanitarian
crisis in 1994 following the signing of
the Oslo Accords a special coordinator
was appointed to oversee the un's
various programs and efforts in the
occupied territories the special
coordinator for the Middle East peace
process faces the daunting task of
navigating a political landscape AP
where the very process of peace is
frequently questioned contested and even
disregarded as the ongoing war on Gaza
nears its sixth month International
organizations say the scale of the
humanitarian crisis has reached
unprecedented levels civilians and
humanitarian Aid workers continue to be
targeted attacked made homeless and
killed with the backdrop of genocidal
assault and suffering the role of the
special coordinator becomes ever more
critical find out more as the un's
special coordinator for the Middle East
peace process tour wesland talks to Al
jazer to Welland un special coordinator
for the Middle East peace process thank
you for joining us here on Al jazer we
have a war in Gaza that has now gone on
for more than 160 days more than 30,000
people killed more than half of those
women and children i' last to ask you
about where we are right now because
there's talks about a fresh ceasefire at
the same time there's talk about an
offensive on Rafa how do you judge this
moment oh it's a very uh important
moment uh we are in a terrible situation
where the war need to come to an end as
fast as
possible uh we are seeing what's going
on on the ground on a daily basis and we
have a lot of questions
unresolved uh that is in Focus here in
DOA over the next days and week I am
hopeful that the two sides and the
mediator will succeed in finding a way
where we can have the release of
hostages and of course in the ongoing
activities on the ground so let's talk
about those two things the possible Rafa
offensive but first those talks that are
going on here in Doha the last ceasefire
last of a week it was in November my
understanding of these talks is they're
trying to get something that's longer
about six weeks I also understand that
the plan would be for female sick and
elderly captives held by Hamas and other
groups in Gaza to be released in return
for a large number of Palestinian
prisoners is there anything more you can
tell us about the the framework here the
only thing I want to say is that it's
planned to go in phases I will not go
into any details uh on on these issues
that's uh I'm here to talk about that
and the UN role in all that and the
humanitarian part of uh this I really
want to see uh the file move forward
because the situation on the ground is
terrible so what is the UN role with
regard to these talks as I understand it
you're not actually at the table are you
on the sidelines I'm talking to the
involved parties all of them for the UN
and for the whole of the humanitarian
system we have since the beginning of
this war been in constant uh contact
with the relevant parties to up our
deliveries we need to do that for all
sorts of humanitarian reasons and we
particularly need it uh if there is an
agreement to start this process of the
release of hostages I do not think that
the war will come to an end at all and
it's not realistic unless unless this is
happening lots of people will be
listening to your words very very
carefully including people in Gaza so
answer me this question how close in
your estimation are we to a new ceas
far I am
hopeful but I can't give uh a timeline
for that that is to be decided uh in the
next days and week but at the same time
as you know the drums of War are being
being sounded from Jerusalem and Tel
Aviv prime minister Netanyahu says he's
finalized his plans battle plans for an
offensive on Rafa now that's a place
where about 1.4 million people are
Sheltering the many of them have fled
from other parts of Gaza how worried are
you I'm deeply concerned we cannot have
an operation in Gaza with 1 million or
more people in Gaza and we cannot be
able to use the access Roots into gasa
we have if this is taking place so it is
for the responsibility of those uh who
are going to conduct military
operation uh to take that into
consideration now prime minister
Netanyahu has also said that hamas's
latest offers ahead of these talks are
ludicrous do you think the talk of the
Rafa offensive could be part of a
negotiating tactic I'm not willing to
com uh comment on that at all and uh
everybody is looking uh after how to
present themselves and I will not uh
make any judgment on that whatsoever let
me give you a quote from the Israeli
Prime Minister we will operate in Rafa
this will take several weeks it will
happen those were his recent words given
the severity and brutality of Israel's
Onslaught over the last five months we
have to take his words seriously don't
we I always take the words of the two
sides seriously and uh that also goes
for uh prime minister netan with regard
to this operation they keep talking
about in Rafa the Israeli military say
they're going to set up humanitarian
Islands now we've heard this before
we've heard them set up safe zones and
as your boss the UN Secretary General
Antonio gues has said there are no safe
zones at all in Gaza so what should
people in Gaza make of this humanitarian
Islands
quote well they will have to decide
themselves I can assure you one thing
that is that the UN is not going to
facilitate that but what the UN is going
to do is to serve the people where they
are with what they need to have isn't
the other problem with a Rafa offensive
the fact that Rafa is currently the
humanitarian gateway to Gaza that's
where the aid has been coming in through
and it is only a trickle of aid but if
there was an offensive even that trickle
might stop I said that to you and uh
there is a clear consensus in order to
facilitate uh the needs of the people on
the
inside we need Road access into gasa
anything else is uh just a fantasy and
we need more access than we have and we
need more access points independently
from whether this is happening in Rafa
or not this is the only viable way to
resume uh the humanitarian deliveries
and the needs of the people in uh Gaza
to be met as you know there's been a new
assessment announced of the humanitarian
situation in terms of food security the
so-called IPC classification has come
down it says that famine is imminent in
Northern Gaza between now and May and
Your Own Boss the Secretary General of
the United Nations has said this is a
man-made famine it is in fact an Israeli
made famine isn't it well let me put it
that way uh we are aware of this we have
been waiting for this assessment to come
it only underlines one point very
clearly that we need to be able to get
into Gaza with more from more access
points and fast as you say getting Aid
in any other way by than road is
inefficient the US has been airdropping
Aid we've had a ship arrive but that
ship's only got about seven trucks of
Aid um the equivalent if it had come by
Road why is more Aid not getting into
Gaza and to me I mean I've been trying
to study this and I've been asking
colleagues of yours from the United
Nations about this for all five months
and the only conclusion I can come to is
Israel is deliberately preventing more
Aid coming in the main arterial roads
are fairly much inaccessible
they are rundown and uh they need to be
kind of upgraded we cannot use this road
for convoys after convoys into the
delivery points in addition to that the
whole area is very crowded uh and the
Law and Order is breaking on the inside
so the delivery uh on the inside is very
very
complicated and that that is the reason
why it is taking time to reach to the
delivery points so that needs to be uh
uh that needs to be addressed and we are
in these discussions on a daily basis
but you talk about the Law and Order
point and you can understand that if
people are starving their children are
starving they're going to try and
intercept any truck they can find that
might have food on it isn't one of the
problems the fact that when those trucks
have had security convoys when they've
had police accompanying those trucks the
Israelis have targeted them listen it it
points to one fact uh and that is that
there need to be an authority that can
actually protect the humanitarian
delivery the way I see that is that we
need to get that in place fast it needs
to be a Palestinian Authority it cannot
be security companies or anybody else we
need to get that uh in place as soon as
possible and for
me uh that that uh is a point that has
to do with
politics we now have to start talking
about the politics of what's going on
and the politics on how to kind of move
forward and that politics is to have a
Palestinian Authority on the ground that
can address these issues protect the
humanitarian delivery and by doing that
protect the destiny of the people people
that are on the inside I'd like to talk
more about that later in the interview
about the Palestinian Authority and
potentially about the two states
solution but just getting back to this
point because I know you've been doing a
lot of negotiation on this humanitarian
Aid there could be more Crossings open
couldn't there Israel is the one that's
preventing that there could be more
inspection staff there could be clearer
inspections there was a story recently
for example a whole truck was turned
away because there were some dates on
the truck and isra said that the stones
in the dates could be used as Weapons
this is this is maddening isn't it
listen I cannot go into the details on
all these stories that are out all the
time my well they come from Aid agencies
who are well well well they're probably
true I think yeah well I mean my point
is something else we need to get these
Delivery Systems improved so we can
deliver faster and safer you said you
can't comment on the little details
special coordinator but Israel is
picking up on these little details
that's why it's stopping entire trucks
coming through and that's what's
preventing in some cases people from
getting the food and medicine they need
well I can tell you the main problem is
that we don't get enough in and we don't
get enough quantities in from different
points of Entry that is the key that is
the key challenge we have uh and that is
something we need to address fast uh
given the circumstances on the ground
and the statements that are coming from
different sides on what may happen on
the road now you went last month to Gaza
I know it's a place you visited very
many times before but this was the first
time you visited Gaza since the start of
the conflict how did that visit affect
you I've never seen anything like this
because some of these areas were not
populated at all in the western part uh
of the strip and I went all the way up
to derbala
and I'm just kind of underlining that
the congestion is massive the
accessibility to the points of delivery
is superbly
complicated uh on both the main roads
and we need to have uh an understanding
for that because it is possible to run
stuff to gasa on a highway but there is
no Highway inside gasa to get these
things safely out did what you saw with
your own eyes look like the result of a
carefully targeted military action
consistent with legitimate self-defense
what I saw was a humanitarian chaos in
the South uh and there is no other way
to describe
it uh I saw desperate people being put
in a desperate
situation and they will continue to be
in that situation up until the war stops
and even after for a long period of time
this is unbearable to see it's
unbearable to handle
and that is why you need there is a need
for
taking rational decision to get it
stopped if we weren't talking about the
tragedy the unfolding tragedy of Gaza we
probably would be talking Would we not
about the West Bank because the
situation there is the worst it's been
in recent memory over 400 Palestinians
killed since the 7th of October last
year was a record year of deaths of
Palestinians killed by Israelis and if
you look at the figures this year
they're even greater than last year how
concerned are you about what Israel is
doing on the West Bank I've been racing
the red flag on this issue repeatedly in
the security Council and obviously my
concern is absolute we have had a
development of flash points at the West
Bank with armed clashes incursions we
have had an expansion of settlements
settler vience demolitions and
everything that makes uh the life at the
West Bank miserable in addition to that
we now have a restriction of movement
that is being imposed that is really
hitting the daily life and the economy
uh on the West Bank in a very very
serious way this is the other side of
the problem this is the other side of
why politics is needed and why we need
to get out of it uh and
and the Palestinian Authority is uh
squeezed into a corner and the
International Community with their
interventions even if uh they've taken
actions against settlements or settlers
have not been able to change this are
they talking Tough Enough on settlers
and settlements on Settlers the number
of settler attacks seems to continue to
rise I'm told your latest un figures say
an average of four settler attacks every
single day and the Israeli military
aren't doing anything about this they
seem to be involved in some of these
attacks and on settlements I believe
from November 2022 to November last year
it's the highest number on record since
you started monitoring about
24,000 new housing units again as has
been going on for decades Israel is
changing the facts on the ground making
your two-state solution for further and
further away by building on what is
supposed to be a Palestinian State the
politics of this is deliberate it's
negative and it's
destructive uh it has been going on it's
still destructive it's negative and it
has been impossible to stop it I clearly
see that the International Community is
very clear on this unanimously and now
there are accidents being taken by
capitals and donors that are very clear
giving a signal here I really hope this
will work because the situation for the
people living at the West Bank is like
it is and we can never find a solution
if we are creating more and more flash
points faster and faster we are building
settlements faster and faster and it's
implemented this is the policy of the
current government and they have speeded
it up even more and I can only say that
this is to be condemned it is
undermining any serious attempt to have
a political solution to this conflict or
even getting in a Direction Where We can
address it uh rationally okay well let's
move to the possible political solution
and and the way forward for all of this
we've discussed let me read you a quote
from your boss the Secretary General
Antonio GES we want to see the creation
of conditions that will allow the
Palestinian Authority to assume respons
posibilities in Gaza and that is in our
opinion the solution to allow for a
two-state solution to become reality so
let's talk about those two things one by
one first the the reinvigorated
Palestinian uh authority to take over
how is that going to work the
Palestinian Authority themselves won't
want to ride into Gaza on the back of an
Israeli tank as it were will they no but
here I think the International Community
need to stand up to make Palestinian
Authority an authority that can be
respected first and foremost by its own
people and also to take upon themselves
the responsibilities both in gasa and
West Bank isn't the fundamental problem
here though the fact that the current
Israeli government and prime minister
Netanyahu don't agree with this plan of
yours and it's also Secretary of State
Anthony blink's plan for the Palestinian
Authority to take this key role a new as
he says reformed and revitalized
Palestinian Authority prime minister
Netanyahu doesn't want the Palestinian
Authority there and he wants to keep an
ongoing security presence of Israel in
Gaza that's the fundamental flaw in your
plan isn't it no it's not a fundamental
flaw in the plan of the International
Community it's a fundamentally flaw in
the policy of Israel now we have a
humanitarian crisis in Gaza but again we
need to get the politics to get these
things fixed 3 months ago I had your
humanitarian colleague um Martin
Griffith sitting in the chair where you
are now he said all voices need to be
heard I quote the voice of Hamas and
other organizations which have been
involved in the Palestinian Universe
need to be heard we need them to be
given the opportunity to tell us their
views about the future do you agree that
Hamas which is not just a military and
political organization but a social
organization that needs to have a role
too I take due note uh of what was said
uh from ramala very recently about the
conditions for moving forward and who
should have the legitimacy to have a
role in any government it's very clear
that you cannot on the back of what has
been going in Gaza and on the back of 7
October immediately
accept uh the organizations that were a
part of that to run into a governance
situation that that will not fly it will
not fly with the Palestinian people it
will not fly if you're going to set up a
system that can work with the
International
Community the discussions on how the
Palestinians are going to uh decide how
to kind of manage and uh discuss their
own Internal Affairs I leave for them to
do but it's not going very well they've
announced a new Palestinian prime
minister um who is 69-year-old Muhammad
Mustafa an experienced econ IST not
doesn't have a lot of political skills
needed some observers say and already
all of the other factions say he's not
the right man for the job you still have
mmud abas as the leader 88 years old
some would say well past his cell by
date he had a four-year term and he's
now in the 20th year of that term I mean
this isn't what Palestinians would want
if they went to the polls is it the
Palestinians will have to go to the
polls when they can go to the polls that
is not now we need to have a bridge now
where we can reset the system so it can
function institutionally but I will say
the
following we will as an International
Community have to support a
strengthening of that system coming into
place that is how it is that is how it
will be and that is how we will move
forward we will not decide whether this
government will last for long or for
short but we will definitely do whatever
we can to get this to work because
because we have no other choice as we've
said the aim still is a two-state
solution now every month you brief the
UN Security Council and as I'm mainly
based at the UN in New York I listen to
that briefing every single month and I
listen to you talk about a two-state
solution I listen to the Palestinian
Ambassador talk about a two-state
solution I listen to the 15 members of
the security Council mainly playing lip
service to the idea of a two-state
solution but there's one person
who never ever mentions a two-state
solution and that's the ambassador of
Israel isn't this the problem you have
that Israel and the current government
the current prime minister they don't
believe in a two-state solution go back
to the time of Oslo prime minister
netanyahu's question the whole ow
process
well just know after this war is coming
to an end there is a new reality and we
have to look at that reality and see
what it takes I've never in all the time
I've been here seen a divide as deep
between the two sides as it is at the
moment there is no kind of togetherness
uh factors anymore and the reality of
the whole thing is that Palestine and
Israel will be separate for a while and
they need to find the crumbling way back
to what that re reality means I think
there needs to be a reink on the way we
approach the concept of a two-state
solution after this war how exactly that
will look like I cannot tell you now but
I'm sure that we need to look at this
realities from the perspective of a
two-state solution there is no plan B to
that ever presented in a credible way we
need to look at uh the realities as it
and find a new way of thinking on how
the two states can live side by side in
peace and
security that is the point of departure
then we have to discuss the details
that's where we are today the diplomacy
on this issue has for decades yes the
un's there but it's been led by the
United States isn't it clear now given
all the money and weapons that the US
continues to give to Israel the fact
that the US representative in the
security Council on three resolutions
has raised their hands to stop a um a
ceasefire a resolution that would have
created a ceasefire that the US is not
neutral they're not an honest broker and
I've had on this program in the last
couple of months president Lula D Silva
of Brazil I've had Russian foreign
minister Sergey lavro and they say no
this needs to be an international
approach the US they shouldn't be
leading this anymore well um what what I
will say is the follow in I am as a
Norwegian Diplomat fully aware of the
Norwegian involvement and the American
involvement in this process and others
uh that have been involved in support of
a two-state solution but how about bring
back the quartet I mean you had this
body which was the US the EU Russia and
the UN maybe expand it throw in China
throw in the Arab League and have a
proper International approach rather
than letting secretary blinkin do all
the running well you know as well as I
do the geopolitics of this world uh and
you know because of that why it doesn't
happen very fast this has to do with a
much broader picture than the one we
have uh in front of us Gaza and the West
Bank and that would continue for a while
until we can get it set back again at
the moment I must say that I'm very uh
in support of any major initiative from
members of the council and others
that will work on the line of trying to
set up a different direction of the
negative trajectory that is on the
ground that is the politics of today it
seems to me that all parts of the
International System on this conflict
right now are sounding the alarm you
have the Secretary General of the United
Nations using that very rare power under
the UN Charter article 99 to convene the
security Council to demand a ceasefire
that didn't work you have the
international court of justice which is
so concerned about
uh genocide uh that it passed what is
called provisional measures which Israel
has completely ignored and now you've
got the IPC warning that a famine is
imminent what is left what's going to
stop this war let's go back to where we
are today Doha let's go back to what is
to be discussed here over the next day
and
week this is a key to getting to a
different place from where we are now
it's a key for uh the Palestinians in
Gaza it's a key uh for Israel and the
war will only stop if we manage to
resolve uh the issue of the hostages and
getting end to this atrocities that we
are seeing on a daily basis happening it
is very desperate for any Diplomat who
is trying to do a serious job in getting
these things fixed and not succeeding
whether you are American un Secretary
General or the special coordinator or
anyone else we need to look at this
differently now we cannot allow this to
slide we have to kind of do better and
do
more in that perspective it will be a
political
mobilization uh that will matter and it
will be our ability to address and help
the people that are suffer suffering on
this uh situation whether they are
family of the hostages underground in
Gaza or whether they are desperate
civilians in hundreds of thousands
sitting stuck in Gaza the way they are
just now un special coordinator to
wesland thank you for talking to Al
jazer thank
you